---
category: health
title:    Nutrition
---

Functional, sustainable nutrition habits are critical for living a healthy life.
You can't exercise enough to make up for eating poorly[^1] so, at the very least, you must eat _well enough_ for a solid foundation.
The key characteristics of a good diet are:

1. It keeps you in the right _energy balance_ to achieve your goals.
2. It provides _enough protein_ to promote muscle protein synthesis.
3. It promotes _metabolic health_ by avoiding spikes in blood sugar and the subsequent corresponding insulin response.
4. It is _enjoyable enough_ that you can maintain adherence over time.

## Energy Balance

Energy balance is the relationship between the amount of energy your body needs to amount of food you eat each day _on average_.

- _Positive energy balance_ means you are eating _more_ than you need.
    - It is easier to build muscle in positive energy balance.
    - Your body stores excess energy in adipose tissue (fat) when you maintain a positive energy balance.
- _Neutral energy balance_ means you are only eating enough to _maintain_ your current body weight.
	- You do not need to adhere to a precise number of calories per day to be in neutral energy balance. Your body has about 400–600 calories of "wiggle room" it can compensate for by raising and lowering a number of metabolic and hormonal processes on a daily basis,
- _Negative energy balance_ means you are eating _less_ than you need.
    - Muscles waste away faster in negative energy balance.
	    - You can limit the disproportionate loss of muscle mass by maintaining a deficit at or below 400 calories per day.
    - Your body _uses up_ the excess energy stored in adipose tissue when you maintain a negative energy balance.

The amount of energy you body burns each day depends on your activity level, your genetics, your gut microbiome, and a host of other factors.
It's difficult and unreliable to _guess_ your energy needs and you _should not_ put any stock in any estimated "exercise calories" numbers generated by fitness trackers or gym equipment.

The only way to get an _accurate_ idea of what your energy needs are is to _carefully and precisely_ track _all_ of the things you eat (use a scale!) and record your weight over time.[^2]
Once you know your total daily energy expenditure (TDEE) and your desired state of energy balance you can determine your daily calorie target.
Your caloric budget can then be divided into target amounts for the three macronutrients.

## Macronutrients

There are three dietary macronutrients (called “macros” colloquially):

- _Carbohydrates_ are sugars and starches.[^3]
    - Carbohydrates are the primary fuel your body uses when you are in positive energy balance.
- _Protein_ is made up of amino acids; it is primarily used is to build the proteins your body needs.
    - Protein _can_ be used as fuel but it isn't very efficient; your body favors other sources of energy.
    - Protein deserves special attention for its role in building and maintaining muscle.
- _Fat_ is made up of fatty acids and, in [metabolically healthy people][1], it can be used as fuel—especially when you're in negative energy balance.
    - Dietary fat is easy for your body to store as adipose tissue if you are in positive energy balance.

Carbohydrates and fats are used as fuel or stored for later.
Protein is used to build, repair, and replace tissues, cells, and cellular structures.

### Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates are a class of nutrients that are similar in chemical structure but vary in complexity.
Sugars are the simplest and are digested the fastest.
Starch is the most complex and must be broken down into sugars before it can be further digested.

You do not need to avoid eating carbohydrates to be healthy.
However, consumption of _refined_ carbohydrates like flour and added sugar can impact your [metabolic health][1] and should be done in moderation.
Favor longer-digesting, lower [glycemic index][2] sources of carbohydrates like beans, legumes, sweet potatoes, and [cruciferous vegetables][3].


The common dietary sugars are glucose and fructose.
Table sugar is about a 50/50 mix of glucose and fructose while high-fructose corn syrup is 60% fructose and 40% glucose.
Glucose and fructose are metabolized in different ways.

- If you’re trying to maximize carbohydrate intake—like during an endurance race that lasts longer than 45 minutes—consume a balance of glucose and fructose.
	- Fructose metabolism is different between men and women; women should _avoid_ fructose as an endurance fuel.
- Fructose is preferentially turned into adipose tissue.[^4]

The liver uses carbohydrates to create and store glycogen which your body uses to maintain glucose homeostasis during long bouts of exercise.
Endurance athletes “bonk” when they run out of glycogen and the nutrients from they’re absorbing from the food they eat during the activity can’t keep up with their their energy (and/or electrolyte) needs.

### Protein

You can vary the distribution of carbohydrates and fat in your diet to meet your energy needs but your body _requires_ a certain amount of protein intake to _maintain_ muscle mass and _even more_ to _promote_ increasing muscle mass.
Since [growing your muscles][4] is critical for your long-term health, you _must_ pay attention to your protein intake.
To do this, you must consider:

- The total amount of protein you eat.
    - Your body needs about 300g of protein per day to support necessary metabolic processes.
        - Your body can get up to 50% of the protein it needs through recycling what it already has.
        - As you age, the rate you can recycle protein goes down so you need a corresponding increase dietary protein to prevent being in a protein deficit; the decline isn't linear, there is a sharp drop off after age 40.
    - A daily target of 1.2–1.8 g/kg/day of protein maximizes muscle protein synthesis.
    - A serving of protein that you're digesting is called a bolus.
        - The _minimum_ effective size of a bolus is around 25g; smaller servings don't activate mTOR.[^5]
        - The _maximum_ effective size of a bolus is around 60g; any more is discarded as waste.
- The "[quality][5]" of the protein you eat.
    - The three most important amino acids for muscle protein synthesis are leucine, lysine, and methionine.
        - Leucine in particular is critical; aim for ≥3g of leucine in the first and last meals of the day (this usually requires about 45g of protein but the exact amount depends on the amino acid distribution of what you're eating).
        - Leucine is ketogenic; it is metabolized as a fatty acid because of its structure.
    - The more protein you eat, towards the 1.8 g/kg/day level, the quality of the protein you eat matters less.

The main takeaway here is that you need to eat a _lot_ of protein to support growing and maintaining muscle—almost assuredly more than you would eat without being deliberate about it.[^6]

### Fat

Fat is an essential nutrient.
Your body _requires_ enough dietary fat to support a healthy endocrine system as fat is an essential ingredient for hormone production.
Dietary fat intake can also impact  many areas of brain function; it is necessary for cognitive health.

Most people eat too much total fat while simultaniously not eating _enough_ of _specific kinds_ of fat.

- Polyunsaturated fat, including omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, have clear long-term health benefits when consumed regularly in sufficient quantity. Good sources of polyunsaturated fat include: sunflower seeds, flax seeds (and oil), and wild-caught[^7] fatty fish like salmon, herring, mackerel, etc. Most people don't get enough in their diet without supplementation or deliberate planing.
- Saturated fat should be eaten in moderation as it contributes to risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD).
- Artificially created trans-unsaturated fatty acids (trans fats) are _very bad_ for ASCVD. Avoid partially hydrogenated oil and other sources of trans fat in your diet.
- Dietary cholesterol is almost exclusively _esterified_ cholesterol. Esterified cholesterol molecules are too large to be absorbed in your digestive system; they are just excreted. _Dietary cholesterol has NO IMPACT on blood cholesterol._
- Medium-chain fatty acids, like MCT oil, can be easily metabolized into ketones which your brain can use a fuel. They can give you a bit of a mental boost in your morning coffee.[^7]

Your body preferentially uses carbohydrates as fuel.
Fats are left in reserve unless you sustain a negative energy balance over time or eat so few carbohydrates you enter and maintain [ketosis][6].
Ketogenic diets had an Internet-driven renaissance in the early part of the 21st century.
Using fat as your primary fuel can be helpful in specific situations:

- For endurance athletes in extremely-long-duration events
- As an augmentation to a cancer treatment plan for cancer patients; cancer cells are able to multiply at a prodigious rate because they can metabolize up to 500 times more glucose than a normal cell. Starve them and it gives other therapies a competitive advantage.
- As part of a targeted, short-term fat-loss program

Ketogenic ("keto") diets aren't a great idea in the long term.

- It is easy to have a high saturated fat intake which, as noted above, is not a good idea over a long period of time.
- They are prone to diet fatigue as you have to give up lots of foods and must do a lot of food prep.
- Things go off the rails easily. If you eat enough carbs to get _out_ of ketosis _while_ eating a lot of fat it's not a good situation.
- Your liver is responsible for producing the ketones your body needs as fuel while in ketosis. Drinking alcohol can compromise its ability to do that.
- In general, it's not a good idea to eliminate one of the three macronutrients from your diet.

Physique athletes, like body builders, must maintain a _very low_ fat intake to get to competitive levels of leanness.
This can cause all kinds of issues as you're depriving your body of an essential nutrient.
There may not be any long-term consequences for doing this _occasionally_ but you can't _maintain_ extremely low levels of body fat _and_ have good long-term health outcomes.

## Micronutrients

Macros aren’t everything.
Your body needs lots of different vitamins and minerals in trace amounts.
It’s tempting to use supplements to meet these needs but it’s better to get micronutrients from real, minimally processed food if you can.

The supplement industry is loosely regulated and rife with bold claims that are hard to verify.

- Are you getting a large enough does for it to have a meaningful effect?
- How does the bioavailability of the _form_ or of the micronutrient in the supplement compare to food sources?
- Do you need additional nutrients in order to effectively process it?
- How consistent is the supplement potency form batch to batch?
- High-quality supplements are _expensive_. Are they worth it to you for the benefit they provide?

## Fiber

Dietary fiber helps digestive health and, in general, is a good proxy for seeing if you’re eating enough minimally-processed fruits and vegetables.
The RDA for fiber is almost assuredly _more_ than you are eating now unless you’re being deliberate about it.

The fiber in your diet that comes from food helps regulate nutrient and sugar absorption in addition to being good for your GI health.
Fiber supplements, in pills or added to processed food, don’t do the same thing.

## Metabolic Health

Metabolically health people can switch between using glycolytic (glucose-based) energy sources and fatty-acid based energy sources.
Metabolic health is underpinned by mitochondrial function.
Mitochondrial function is improved by [endurance training][7] and, unless you are currently doing several hours of endurance training a week, you are _almost certainly not_ metabolically healthy.

Metabolic health is also influenced by diet.
Specifically, spikes in blood glucose—and the corresponding spikes in insulin response—can be moderated with dietary factors:

- The total amount of carbohydrates in your diet.
    - One rule of thumb is to keep carbohydrates to less that 30g/meal to dampen insulin response.
- The [glycemic index][5] of the carbohydrates you consume. The higher the glycemic index the faster sugar enters your bloodstream.
    - Carbohydrates in unprocessed foods, like vegetables, are stored in and around dietary fiber which slows their digestion.
    - Processed, and especially hyper-processed, foods digest _faster_ which causes spikes in blood sugar.
- Energy balance also plays a role in metabolic health.
	- Maintaining a negative energy balance can adversely affect your metabolic health because your body reacts to the calorie deficit by slowing your metabolism.
	- Maintaining a positive energy balance means your body is far more likely to _only_ use glycolytic energy sources for fuel; this effect is more pronounced the larger the energy surplus. Many diabetic and pre-diabetic people have lost the ability to use fatty acids as fuel and thus _depend solely_ on energy from the sugar that’s wrecking havoc on their overall health.

The factors listed above all point to the benefits of moderation.
Tempering the amount and the speed that sugar enters your bloodstream helps your body maintain glucose homeostasis without having to work too hard.
Keep your pancreas and your liver happy; they’ll thank you for it later in life.


Your blood sugar levels are a good proxy for understanding your metabolic health.
The _most accurate_ way to track your blood glucose is with a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) like the ones made by [Dexcom][8].[^9]
Because they can be used to _administer_ insulin as medical devices, CGMs aren't readily available to consumers unless you have a prescription from your doctor.

## Palatability & Pleasure

Eating good food is one of life's simple pleasures.
If you don't enjoy what you're eating _enough_ then you're not going to be able to sustain your eating habits for the long term.
The trick is finding the right balance between:

- Meeting your nutritional needs
- Exercising enough
- Having times where you can enjoy yourself

The most important thing is to find things that you _actually like_ for you to eat on a regular basis.
Changing your diet can change your palate[^10] so what you like in the future may not be the same things you crave now.
And, even when you're eating the kind of food you need consistently, it's still totally fine to have the occasional meal or, or day, where you eat whatever makes you happy.[^11]

[^1]: People who do hours a day of [endurance training][6] _can_ eat a lot and get away with it but it is _always_ possible to outpace your calories burned by over-eating.
[^2]: This is exactly how [MacroFactor][9] works. I have had a great experience using that app to both loose and maintain weight.
[^3]: There are _technically_ three types of carbohydrates as they are classified by their degree of polymerization. From smallest to largest molecule size they are: sugars, oligosaccharides (like maltodextrine), and polysaccharides (starch is not the only polysaccharide). Most people don't need to know about this.
[^4]: It is believed that the mutation that introduced the metabolic pathway that preferentially turns fructose into fat happened when early humans were trying to survive the last ice age. It kept us alive then when food was scarce. It’s killing us now in times of plenty.
[^5]: [mTOR][10] (Mammalian target of [rapamycin][11]) is the primary signaling mechanism for muscle protein synthesis.
[^6]: The daily [Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for protein][12], while enough to keep you alive, is only a half to a third as much protein as it takes to maximize muscle protein synthesis.
[^7]: Salmon from fish farms _does not_ have the health benefits of wild-caught salmon. Farmed fish don't eat the same diet as wild fish so they have _much_ lower concentrations of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids. However, depending on the farming facility, they _may_ have lower mercury levels than wild-caught fish.
[^8]: A early advocate of MCT-oil-to-start-the-day was [bulletproof coffee][13]. Dave Asprey, who founded bulletproof, has been peddling fringe (_\*cough\*_ "innovative") health ideas since before 2011 so take it with a grain of salt. In my experience, as little as a half tablespoon of MCT oil in a cup of black decaf coffee first thing in the morning has a perceptible benefit without any GI consequences.
[^9]: There is a clear benefit for CGM devices in people with diabetes and those who are at risk of developing diabetes. The benefit for metabolically healthy people is less clear but, at the very least, they are still a window into what is _actually happening_ in your body.
[^10]: I followed a ketogenic diet for over a year. In that time my cravings for sugar essentially disappeared. My mood improved too.
[^11]: _If you are not diabetic. If you have diabetes don't be careless; you could die._ As long as you are metabolically healthy, you can take some form "diet break" for a week or two, like on a vacation or the holiday season, and the consequences won't be too dire—especially if you maintain reasonable portion sizes.

[1]: /codex/nutiriton/#metabolic-health
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glycemic_index
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cruciferous_vegetables
[4]: /codex/strengh-training/
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protein_quality
[6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ketosis
[7]: /codex/endurance-training/
[8]: https://www.dexcom.com/en-us
[9]: https://macrofactorapp.com
[10]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MTOR
[11]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sirolimus
[12]: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56068/table/summarytables.t4/?report=objectonly
[13]: https://www.bulletproof.com/recipes/bulletproof-diet-recipes/bulletproof-coffee-recipe/
